Hopefully, I didn't
traumatize you with testing.
I was only trying to prepare you for
what is to come with testing,
but it can be fun.
Like I said,
go check out some of those courses.
I'm sure smarter people than me
have better ways to do testing that
are enjoyable.
So go check those out and
let me know on Twitter what you think.
And help me with my testing, so thank you.
Now we will move on to servers.
So we built the CLI,
we've talked about file systems,
we've done asynchronous programming.
I mean at this point we've done it all.
If you just stopped right there and
combined all that, you could build so
many things in Node.
I'm just gonna list some things you've
used before, that use just those things.
So, Webpack, Parcel, Vite, any build tool
uses everything, you just learn.
It's a CLI with file systems.
That's literally all they do, right?
I mean, [LAUGH] they do way more than
that, but at the end of the day,
that's the core of those apps.
Any tool that scaffolds out files for you,
a linting tool,
you're using a tool that lints things.
It's a CLI that reads files and does things.
Actually a lot of those linters depending
on how you run them might have servers as
well, but most of the time
it's like a reading a file.
I'm applying regexes and rules to it, and
I'm giving you some output from that right
at the end of the day so a lot of stuff.
But now we're gonna talk about servers,
which is probably the most popular and
obvious thing for any OS level language,
and Node.js is no different.
So in the context of Node, a server is
really just a program that listens for
incoming network request and
that that's really it, and
then it just returns a response
to that network request.
So what is a network request?
I mean, if I go here and hit refresh,
I just did a network request, right?
So if I go to the console,
I go click on network,
I can see the requests that I made.
So I'm going to click on All,
refresh this.
And all the network requests that were
made on this page are, this is so
big, there we go.
It's a lot probably for this page,
but 59 requests, but as you can see,
each one of these is a network request.
It went somewhere to the Internet,
and it came back with something.
Let's just look at the HTML ones.
So if we click on doc, we can see back.
We can see we got the HTML for
this website right here.
Here's the raw HTML, or in this case,
it looks like it's not writing HTML.
This is using some JavaScript.
But as you can see,
it's just going over Internet,
and it's getting some information back,
but from where?
Where is this information coming from?
That's a server.
It's going to a server.
Each one of these addresses,
as you can see when I hover over this,
it has an address.
That's a location to a server somewhere,
right?
And that server can respond
back with anything.
In this case,
it respond back with some HTML.
And there's different types of servers.
There's traditional servers
that run constantly.
There's CDNs, which are basically servers
that are replicated across the world and
are directed, has traffic directed to
them based off geographical location,
and they can cache things.
There's serverless servers, servers
that aren't on until you actually make
a request to them, then they turn on,
then they turn off.
There's so
many different types of servers.
At the end of the day,
it's just a computer that's connected to
the internet that can handle requests.
And it can handle requests by sending back
all different types and forms of data.
So we're talking JSON.
We're talking HTML images,
CSS JavaScript files, streaming data,
audio, video, email,
anything that's data it can send back.
So that's basically what a server is.
Some servers are real time as
they have two-way communication.
Have you ever played a video game or
if you've done a Google doc You can see
the presence of someone
being on that document?
That's real time.
Some servers are not real time like HTTP,
and
you can only make a request and
get a response.
But you can do all of
that plus more in Node.js.
So it can get pretty complicated.
But for us, we're going to talk
about A Simple HTTP Server,
that just sends back some content.
So by default, we get to use
the core embedded, or I'm sorry,
core internal node module called HTTP,
and we can do that to create a server.
So let's give it a try.
So I'm gonna walk through that,
and then we'll test it out.
So I'm just gonna make a new
file here called server.
It's mostly just test code here.
So I'm gonna import http from node http,
and
basically to create a server with this,
all we have to do is just use this
create server function, right?
So we can say server equals create or
http.createServer,
takes a callback because
it's asynchronous, and
we get two things back here.
The first one is always gonna be the
incoming request objects, and the second
one is always gonna be an object in which
we can use to respond to the request.
That's a pattern you'll see all the time
req response, req res, req res,
that's the request, that's the response.
This is who's asking,
this is how we reply.
Okay, and then from there,
there's a bunch of different things.
We can do status code, so
we can set the status code.
So I can say status code is 200.
There's a whole thing about status codes,
but at the end of the day,
it's actually quite simple.
And really, they're they're mostly for
browsers and people who respect this.
But status codes are just a way for
us, as it's just a way for
applications to notify other applications
what the status of a request was, right?
Because the applications aren't gonna read
the data to understand what the status
was, but a status code is helpful.
So if you anything that's between
200 to 300 is successful,
anything in the 300 is successful,
but cached.
This data isn't fresh.
It was cached by the browser or
the server.
Anything in the four hundreds
is the user sent a bad request.
Anything in the five hundreds
is the server messed up?
That's basically it.
So 200, 300, good,
400 user messed up 500, server messed up.
And there's different status codes for
instance,
you know a 401 means you sent
the wrong information a 404,
which you've probably seen before,
it means this URL does not exist, right?
A 500 might mean our server died.
Sorry.
Alright, a 503 might be your not your
forbidden or sorry, that's 403 or 503.
I don't know what that is.
It might be like a payment thing.
That's a 502.
I don't know.
There's a lot of them.
You just don't remember these things.
You just go look them up.
You just go reference them.
So that's status codes.
And some technologies don't
even care about status codes,
like GraphQL literally does not care
about status codes, everything's a 200.
It doesn't matter.
It literally uses the data to determine
what the status of something was and
not the codes themselves.
Status codes these days are mostly for
other systems like browsers,
cuz a chrome or any browser knows
what to do and what to show.
If a certain status code comes in,
If it sees like a 400,
it'll show a red error your
console because it sees a 400.
If it sees a 200, it won't show that
I don't think it was successful,
even though you might
have sent back an error.
So it's mostly for other systems.
So I got status code.
We can set things like a header.
So in this case I can
say res.setHeader and
a headers are just basically like
a collection of key value pairs.
So one of the most popular
useful headers is content type.
This is gonna determine what type of,
this is telling the client what type
of data you're sending back to it.
So in this case,
you use a specific MIME type.
If you don't know what a MIME type is,
a Mime type is basically like
the equivalent of a file type,
but for the Internet.
It's like, this is the type of
data that I'm going to send you
right in this example I'm using,
is a type of text that is plain,
and there's all different types
of MIMEs out there, right?
I might be able to do like, data JSON or
something like that, right?
This is one of the things you also
just got to look up cuz there are so
many of them, or I could be like
text HTML or something like that.
There's images, there's so many things.
In this case,
I'm just ponna send back plain text.
This is just so
the browser knows how to process this.
If you really think about it,
a browser is an app that can render
all different sorts of content.
You give it a PDF, it'll show it.
You give it an HTML file, it'll show it.
You give it JavaScript, it'll execute it.
It can render so
many different types of files.
This is how you help it understand what
that file is, with just this one header.
Okay, and then now the last thing we
can do is we can just end, as in okay,
we're done.
We're responding back to the client.
We can say res.end, and
send back a message, Hello there, right?
Cool, so now we got that,
the next thing we need to do is
we need to start the server.
So we can say server.listen,
and servers listen on ports.
So what is a port?
A port you have to have,
you have to connect to a port.
You have to use a port in order to connect
to a socket which enables us to do HTTP
communication.
If your computer's a server,
it's just not connected to the World
Wide Web, but it has ports on it.
So you have to have your
server listen on a port.
It's just a four-digit number,
sometimes a five-digit number,
very common ones you might see
are like 3000, 3001, 4000, 5000.
Just pick a four digit number.
It's not special.
Just pick one.
You have to think too hard about it.
When you're actually working on an app at
your job, you'll probably have 10 of these
running at any given time
with all different ports.
You might get an error saying, this port's
already in use and you can't use it.
Pick another number,
add a one to it, and try again.
There's also tools to help you that you
can download up here in your toolbar that
might show you what ports are being used,
or you could use a terminal for
that as well.
I'm just gonna listen on 4000.
You can pick whatever number you want.
Always I'm picking 4000.
Think I have something on 3000 right now.
I think I have something of 5000,
I don't know.
We're gonna figure out I always got
something running on my machine.
So this is also asynchronous.
So when this is done,
I was going to say console dot log.
Server running on port 4000 like that.
I'm just gonna do that.
Actually, I'm just gonna put the whole URL
here so I can click on it in my terminal.
So localhost 4000, http goes 4000.
So it's always gonna be localhost.
Or it'll be, you know, the localhost IP,
which we want to 127.0.0.1, but
you could just put localhost.
Cool, and
then the port is after the colon.
So even websites have ports, right?
This website has a port.
It's just that it's dropped.
You don't see it, but
every deployed website is on like Port 80.
Every website, you just don't see it,
but it's like there.
So we're on port 4000 on our local
host not deployed to the Internet.
So we have our server, and
now we can just run this, right?
So we can say node server.js and boom.
Two things to note here,
the program didn't stop.
It's still running.
Every up until now, we'd run
the program and then it would stop.
It would shut down.
We run the command, and
then it would stop.
I ran the command and it's still running.
I can exit it.
See, I had to exit it to quit it.
So servers are always on.
They're like listening,
that's why you need a port.
So they're waiting for
an incoming request.
So that's why you hear like,
my God, someone's server crashed.
Yeah, it did this, it did they die.
So now I can't handle requests.
It's a bad thing.
If your servers crashed, unless you have
something like serverless where it's never
on, it's just,
in only spins up when you need it.
But for the most part,
you don't want your service crashing.
So that's one thing.
Now, if I go to this,
this thing just freaks out.
Why did it freak out?
Status code is not a function
maybe it's just data's no
it's not a function, it's a property.
There we go, try that again.
And refresh, and
then there we go, hello there.
I get back hello there from my server.